= Consent

Consent is an access control abstraction layer for ActionController. It lets you restrict access
to actions across your application using a single config file, rather than scattering access
logic across your controllers using verify() and method-specific logic. It acts as a single
before_filter to all your controllers and checks whether an action can run according to the
rules you've set. Think of it as a firewall that sits between your routes file and your
controller logic.


== Installation

  ruby script/plugin install git://github.com/jcoglan/consent.git

On installation, Consent adds a file to your app at <tt>config/consent.rb</tt>. This file
is where you write the access control rules for your application. You should see a block
beginning:

  Consent.rules do

You should write all your rules inside this block. Each rule is made up of two parts: a
request expression, and a block that should return +true+ if the request is allowed, and
+false+ if it should be denied. For example, here's a simple rule that restricts requests
to <tt>SiteController#hello</tt> to only use Ajax:

  site.hello { request.xhr? }

Writing rules is covered in some detail below.

Consent also adds some helpers to your controllers and routes file. To keep your routes
working, you need to remove the +map+ parameter in <tt>config/routes.rb</tt>. So:

  # in config/routes.rb
  
  # replace
  ActionController::Routing::Routes.draw do |map|
  
  # with
  ActionController::Routing::Routes.draw do

Finally, add the Consent +before_filter+ to the top of your <tt>ApplicationController</tt>
to enable the Consent firewall for incoming requests:

  # in app/controllers/application.rb
  
  class ApplicationController < ActionController::Base
    before_filter :check_access_using_consent
    
    # other filters, settings, etc...
  end


== Request expressions

The first part of any rule is called the expression list. This is a snippet of Ruby
code that is used to match requests to the controllers in your application. The expression
language allows for matching of controllers, actions, parameters, response formats and
HTTP methods, and provides a declarative method for referring to your app's actions.


=== Expression grammar

The basic grammar for expression lists is:

  list          ::=   expression [+ expression]*
  expression    ::=   controller[action]?[params]?[format]?
  controller    ::=   name[/name]*
  action        ::=   .name
  params        ::=   (:name => value[, :name => value]*)
  format        ::=   [.|*]name
  name          ::=   [a-z][a-z_]*
  value         ::=   integer|string|regexp|range

That might seem a little abstract, so here are some examples. In the right-hand column,
a symbol refers to a parameter, e.g. ":id" should be read as "params[:id]".

  Expression                          Requests matched
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  site.hello                          SiteController#hello
  users                               All UsersController actions
  profiles.edit(:id => 12)            ProfilesController#edit where :id == 12
  pages(:id => "foo")                 All PagesController actions where :id == "foo"
  site(:name => /foo/i, :id => 4)     SiteController, :name contains "foo", :id == 4
  ajax/maps                           All actions in Ajax::MapsController
  ajax/maps.find                      Ajax::MapsController#find
  admin/users.search(:q => 4..8)      Admin::UsersController#search, :q between 4 and 8
  tags.list.json                      TagsController#list where the format is JSON
  tags*xml                            Any TagsController action where the format is XML
  tags(:q => "lolz")*txt              TagsController, :q == "lolz" and format is TXT

Expressions are combined into a list using the <tt>+</tt> operator. For example, the
following complete rule matches <tt>SiteController#hello</tt> and all <tt>PagesController</tt>
actions where <tt>:id</tt> == <tt>"foo"</tt>, and restricts them so that they can only be
accessed using GET requests and a <tt>:name</tt> parameter:

  site.hello + pages(:id => "foo") { request.get? and !params[:name].nil? }


=== HTTP method filtering

You can also use HTTP verbs (get, post, etc) in your expressions to match more specific
requests. Each HTTP method takes a list of one or more expressions and narrows the scope
of the expressions to a specific verb. For example, this matches all <tt>UsersController</tt>
actions using any verb, POST requests to <tt>ProfilesController#update</tt>, and PUT
requests to <tt>TagsController</tt> and <tt>SiteController#hello</tt>:

  users + post(profiles.update) + put(tags + site.hello)


== Decision blocks

Decision blocks always appear at the end of a rule, and should return +true+ if the request
is allowed and +false+ if it should be denied. Within the block, you have access to the
+request+, +params+ and +session+ objects so you can use them to make decisions about whether
to allow the request.

Within a decision block, you can use the words +deny+ and +allow+ to clean code up a bit.
Both these keywords cause the block to return early without processing any other instructions;
+deny+ denies the request and +allow+, well, allows it. For example, the following rule
blocks requests for <tt>:id</tt> between 45 and 60, except for if <tt>:id</tt> is 54:

  users.update(:id => 45..60) do
    allow if params[:id].to_i == 54
    false
  end

If <tt>:id</tt> is 54, the rule allows the request; +allow+ makes the block return early
so it does not return the value +false+ from its last expression.


=== Be careful with +allow+ and +deny+

Note that +allow+ and +deny+ are only intended for returning early from rule blocks, and
are provided because you can't actually use the +return+ statement in Ruby blocks without
running into some weird differences between procs, blocks and lambdas. You might be
tempted to use them to write more expressive single-line rules, but this can lead to
ambiguous rules. For example:

  # Rule A
  tags.create { allow unless request.get? }
  
  # Rule B
  tags.create { deny if request.get? }

These look like they might do the same thing, but they don't. In the face of a GET request,
rule +A+ won't call +allow+ and will simply return +nil+, while rule +B+ will call +deny+
and block the request. Since +deny+ is a stronger command than +allow+ (requests are allowed
by default!), Consent ignores a +nil+ response to a rule as this makes sure +deny+ rules
like +B+ work all the time.

In short: if you want a request to be blocked, the rule must call +deny+ or +redirect+,
or evaluate to +false+. Anything else will be ignored. The best way to write the above
rules is:

  tags.create { !request.get? }


=== Redirects

You can also perform redirects from rule blocks using the +redirect+ keyword. Again, this
keyword blocks execution of the rest of the block, and it allows you to use the same
shorthand for action expressions as is used for matching requests (see above). For example,
here's a simple rule to block all requests to <tt>ProfilesController</tt>, redirecting
to <tt>SiteController#hello</tt>:

  profiles { redirect site.hello }

Note that if you only specify a controller with no action to redirect to, the Rails
convention is to use the +index+ action. For example, this rule redirects to
<tt>UsersController#index</tt> if there is no user logged in, otherwise the request
is allowed:

  profiles do
    redirect users unless session[:user]
    allow
  end


=== Throttling

Rule blocks can be used to throttle traffic to actions using identifier keys. For example,
you may have a controller that exposes a web service API to your application, and users
need to use an API key to make requests to it. If you wanted to limit each client to a
maximum of a thousand requests per day to <tt>ApiController</tt>, you could write:

  api { throttle params[:api_key], 1000.per_day }

This monitors incoming requests matching the expression +api+, splits the traffic up
by the value of <tt>params[:api_key]</tt>, and makes sure that no one key can make more
than 1000 requests in any 24-hour period. You're saying, "Each value of
<tt>params[:api_key]</tt> can make 1000 requests per day to <tt>ApiController</tt>".

In general, you'll want to throttle on a per-client basis (where "client" could mean an
API key, a user in the database, an IP address, a referring URL, etc) but if you want a
global throttle just put in a constant value:

  graphs.generate { throttle :all, 200.per(15.minutes) }

This means that <tt>GraphsController#generate</tt> will fulfill no more than 200 requests
in any 15-minute period in total for all incoming traffic, not just per user.

The full throtlling API is as follows:

* +throttle+ takes two arguments. The first must be a string or symbol, and the second
  must be a rate expression.
* Rate expressions are generated by calling +per_second+, +per_minute+, +per_hour+,
  +per_day+ or +per_month+ on an integer. You can also simply use +per+, as shown above,
  which takes a number of seconds.

Here are some more examples. Don't take these as gospel as being the best way of doing
various things, they're only meant to make the API clearer...

  # Slow down naive dictionary attacks from single machines
  users.login { throttle request.remote_ip, 1.per(5.seconds) }
  
  # Each subdomain can serve 500/day
  profiles*html { throttle request.subdomains.first, 500.per_day }
  
  # Stop Digg taking your site down
  pages.expensive_action { throttle request.referrer, 20.per_second }
  
  # Slow site down for one particular user
  photos { throttle :all, 3.per_hour if session[:user] == "joker" }

Note the last one throttles all requests for one chosen user, rather than for all users.
You're calling +throttle+ conditionally based on the session data, rather than creating
a blanket rule for all users.

Also note that at present Consent stores request history in memory, so memory usage will
increase if you use long time periods. This feature has not been load-tested in production
yet, but if people report problems I'll consider storing requests in SQLite.


== Helper methods

To make it easier to write clean rules and reduce repetition, Consent allows you to define
helper methods in the rule block that you can then use within rules to make decisions. For
example, let's say we want a method to grab the current user from the session:

  helper(:user) { User.find(session[:user_id]) }

We can then use this helper in our rules:

  profiles.update { user && user.is_admin? }

Consent provides a few built-in helpers to access commonly used data for performing access
control. They are as follows:

* +request+, +params+ and +session+ provide access to the objects of the same name
  that are commonly accessed in controller code.
* +format+ returns a +StringInquirer+ for testing the response format. For example,
  <tt>format.json?</tt> returns +true+ if JSON format has been requested.
* <tt>development?</tt>, <tt>production?</tt> and <tt>test?</tt> each return +true+ or
  +false+ in response to the environment the app is currently running in.

For example, if you want <tt>DebugController</tt> accessible only during development, this
rule will do just that:

  debug { development? }


== Extra: request expressions aren't just for your <tt>consent.rb</tt>

For the sake of being extra specially helpful, Consent gives you the ability to use the
request expression language described above in your controllers, and in your routes file.
For example, you can map a route like so:

  # Shorthand expression for
  # map.connect "foo", :controller => "tags", :action => "list", :format => "xml"
  
  map.connect "foo", tags.list.xml

Or, you can use expressions with +redirect_to+ in controller code:

  # Redirects to :controller => "users", :action => "create", :name => "jcoglan"
  
  redirect_to users.create(:name => "jcoglan")

These expressions make heavy use of +method_missing+ and operator overloading, so if you
really care about performance or you find they cause any other problems, go into this
plugin's init.rb and comment out any line that looks like:

  include Consent::Extensions::Xxx


== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2009 James Coglan, released under the MIT license
